---
title: "Intro to Linux"
date: 2021-06-29T18:55:46+05:30
draft: true
---

# What is Linux?

Linux is another operating system comparable to macOS and Windows.
Although it is technically not refered to as a wholesome OS like its
popular counterparts, there are distributions of Linux
(flavours/variations) of it which can be directly compared.

Linux is based on UNIX, similar to macOS, but that is pretty much where
the similarities end. It was created by Linus Torvalds with a free, open
source license, which is the main reason it grew so much in popularity.
But, the software that Linus created, is only what is called the Linux
Kernel, which is not an entire operating system.

## Distributions (or distros)

Other developers and companies over the years, have created their own
versions of an operating system called distributions (or distro for
short) building up on Linux. Few examples of these distributions are
Debian, Arch Linux, Red Hat Enterprise, etc. Some of these distributions
can only be used with a command-line interface (no graphical interface),
but it is possible for users to install desktop environments or window
managers for them to actually use it as a modern desktop operating
system. 

Linux has grown in popularity over the years, and due to its free and
open source nature, there are so many forks and branches of different
distributions which are based on each other. An example is Ubuntu
created by Canonical, one of the most popular distros in existence right now, which is based on
one of the oldest distributions called Debian. Another popular
distribution created by the company System76, is popOS, which is based
on Ubuntu, which is based on Debian.

![Red Hat Family Tree](/1280px-RedHatFamilyTree1210.svg.png)

The image above shows the numerous branches or forks of one particular
distribution called Red Hat which is meant for enterprise businesses.

# Differences between Linux and Windows (or macOS)

## Performance and Efficiency

Linux operating systems or distributions are extremely light-weight and
efficient compared to their proprietary counterparts. The user is in
full control of what runs on their system at all times, and any
component can be removed and installed at any point of time. This causes
computers to run tasks and perform much better on Linux rather on
somthing like Windows. 

I can personally vouch for this as I have a new Dell XPS 13 with an
Intel i7, which initially had Windows 10 Home pre-installed. Although
there is not much of a performance difference between the Home and Pro
versions, I should have been recieving excellent performance for the
hardware I had. But, I often experienced sluggishness, animations losing
frames, and the laptop often overheating. Once I jumped on to a linux
distro (Ubuntu), I immediately experienced extremely snappy responses,
and the overheating issues vanished. All of this was during regular
browsing, video conferencing, etc.

## Security

Linux is vastly more secure for two main reasons. Firstly, it is not
nearly as popular as Windows or MacOS, so viruses are usually not made
with Linux in mind. There are very few viruses made more Linux distros
and you will not be needing to install any anti-virus software. Another
reason is also probably because people using Linux are usually a little
more tech-savvy and are careful when installing file from the internet.
As long as you are aware of the file types and permissions on your
system, you shouldn't have to worry.

Secondly, because Linux is open source, vulnerabilities are quickly
identified and patched by any knowledgeable person in the community,
without having to wait for months from some company to provide a
security patch. One could make the argument that if the code is open
source, hackers or malicious individuals could easily exploit
vulnerabilities. But, there are far more people looking to usually fix
bugs and improve the system because they are the ones who are going to
use it at the end of the day.

## Reliability and Stability

Linux is extremely stable and reliable. This is a well-known fact as it
is employed in thousands of servers around the world which are running
Linux continuously without any crashes or errors. Even Microsoft, which
has their own Windows for Servers OS, uses Linux for their servers. They
usually have high uptime and very rarely crash or provide issues. 

And, my most favourite feature of Linux, is that when something goes
wrong, you get very descriptive error messages telling you what and
where the issue has occured. Using this information, you can most likely
understand the problem and rectify it, or a quick Google search (or
Brave, DuckDuckGo, etc.) will always find you the answer from countless
blog posts and forums where the same question and error has probably
been answered multiple times. In other OSs, it is almost impossible to
get help, because when something goes wrong, it just says 'Oops,
somthing has gone wrong', and you are pretty much helpless. Even if you
try to ask someone online, there are probably a 100 possible errors
which provide the same message.



